docs(tproxy): restructure and expand transparent proxy documentation (#2064)
kumahq/kuma-website: app/_src/networking/transparent-proxy/introduction.md

---
title: Transparent Proxy
content_type: how-to
---

{% assign docs = "/docs/" | append: page.version %}
{% assign Kuma = site.mesh_product_name %}
{% assign tproxy = site.data.tproxy %}

{% capture tproxy-config-reference-info %}
For a full list of transparent proxy settings with examples and configuration options, see the [Transparent Proxy Configuration Reference]({{ docs }}/reference/transparent-proxy-configuration/).
{% endcapture %}

> A transparent proxy is a server that intercepts network traffic going to and from a service without requiring any changes to the application code. In {{ Kuma }}, it captures this traffic and routes it to the [data plane proxy]({{ docs }}/production/dp-config/dpp/#data-plane-proxy), allowing [Mesh policies]({{ docs }}/policies/introduction/#policies) to be applied.

Reviewer: I think that we should change link here and link to concepts page, for data plane https://kuma.io/docs/2.9.x/introduction/concepts/#data-plane and for policies.

Author: addressed

> A transparent proxy is a server that intercepts network traffic going to and from a service without requiring any changes to the application code. In {{ Kuma }}, it captures this traffic and routes it to the [data plane proxy]({{ docs }}/production/dp-config/dpp/#data-plane-proxy), allowing [Mesh policies]({{ docs }}/policies/introduction/#policies) to be applied.

Reviewer: I think it would be good to add this `transparent proxy` definition to our concepts page https://kuma.io/docs/2.9.x/introduction/concepts/ and link from concepts to this page for further information

Author: addressed

> {{ Kuma }} uses [iptables](https://linux.die.net/man/8/iptables) and also has experimental support for [`eBPF`](#transparent-proxy-with-ebpf-experimental) to make this possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{ Kuma }} uses [iptables](https://linux.die.net/man/8/iptables) to make this possible. Moreover, {{ Kuma }} offers experimental support for [eBPF](https://ebpf.io/) 
```

I don't like mixing special formatting with links. When I was reading this doc I didn't know it was link until I moved my mouse over it by accident. Also I think we could link to eBPF here as we link to iptables

Author: addressed

{% tip %}
For details on how the transparent proxy works in {{ Kuma }}, see the [Technical Overview]({{ docs }}/networking/transparent-proxy/technical-overview/).
{% endtip %}

## Kubernetes

In [Kubernetes mode]({{ docs }}/introduction/architecture/#kubernetes-mode), the transparent proxy is automatically set up through the `kuma-init` container or [Kuma CNI]({{ docs }}/production/dp-config/cni/). By default, it intercepts all incoming and outgoing traffic and routes it through the `kuma-dp` sidecar container, so no changes to the application code are needed.

{{ Kuma }} works smoothly with [Kubernetes DNS for Services and Pods](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/dns-pod-service/) and provides its own [Kuma DNS]({{ docs }}/networking/dns/), which is especially helpful in multi-zone setups for cross-zone service discovery.

In this mode, {{ Kuma }} requires the transparent proxy to be enabled, so it **cannot be turned off**.

### Configuration

> {:#kubernetes-installation}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{:#kubernetes-configuration}
```

Author: addressed

If the default settings don’t fit your needs, see [Adjusting Transparent Proxy Configuration on Kubernetes]({{ docs }}/networking/transparent-proxy/configuration-on-kubernetes/) for ways to change settings and their recommended uses.

{{ tproxy-config-reference-info }}

## Universal

Using the transparent proxy in [Universal mode]({{ docs }}/introduction/architecture/#universal-mode) makes setup easier and enables features that wouldn’t be possible otherwise. Key benefits include:

- **Simplified `Dataplane` resources**: You can skip the `networking.outbound` section, so you don’t have to list each service your application connects to manually. Here’s an example without outbound entries:

  ```yaml
  type: Dataplane
  name: {% raw %}{{ name }}{% endraw %}
  networking:
    address: {% raw %}{{ address }}{% endraw %}
    inbound:
    - port: {% raw %}{{ port }}{% endraw %}
      tags:
        kuma.io/service: demo-client 
    transparentProxying:
      redirectPortInbound: {{ tproxy.defaults.redirect.inbound.port }}
      redirectPortOutbound: {{ tproxy.defaults.redirect.outbound.port }}
  ```

> - **Easier service naming**: Use the `.mesh` [DNS domain]({{ docs }}/networking/dns/) to connect to services, like `https://service-1.mesh`, without needing `localhost` and ports from the `Dataplane` resource.

Reviewer: is it `service naming`? we are not creating names for service, we are creating hostnames for service. 
Maybe we could change this to: `fully utilize Kuma DNS`? What do you think?

Author: addressed

> - **Flexible service naming with [VirtualOutbound]({{ docs }}/policies/virtual-outbound) policy**: It lets you:

Reviewer: I think that we should be promoting new MeshService since 2.9. Maybe we should link HostNameGenerator here instead of VirtualOutbounds for version > 2.9.x.

Author: addressed

---
title: Transparent Proxy
content_type: explanation
---

{% assign docs = "/docs/" | append: page.release %}
{% assign Kuma = site.mesh_product_name %}

A transparent proxy is a server that intercepts network traffic going to and from a service without requiring any changes to the application code. In {{ Kuma }}, it captures this traffic and routes it to the [data plane proxy]({{ docs }}/production/dp-config/dpp/#data-plane-proxy), allowing [Mesh policies]({{ docs }}/policies/introduction/#policies) to be applied.

{{ Kuma }} uses [iptables](https://linux.die.net/man/8/iptables) and also has experimental support for [eBPF](#transparent-proxy-with-ebpf-experimental) to make this possible.

{% tip %}
For details on how the transparent proxy works in {{ Kuma }}, see the [Technical Overview]({{ docs }}/networking/transparent-proxy/technical-overview/).
{% endtip %}

## Kubernetes

> In [Kubernetes mode]({{ docs }}/introduction/architecture/#kubernetes-mode), the transparent proxy is automatically set up through the `kuma-init` container or [Kuma CNI]({{ docs }}/production/dp-config/cni/). By default, it intercepts all incoming and outgoing traffic and routes it through the `kuma-dp` sidecar container, so no changes to the application code are needed.

Author: Updated. Should be good now, what do you think?

> {{ Kuma }} works smoothly with [Kubernetes DNS for Services and Pods](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/dns-pod-service/) and provides its own [Kuma DNS]({{ docs }}/networking/dns/), which is especially helpful in multi-zone setups for cross-zone service discovery.

Author: addressed

In this mode, {{ Kuma }} requires the transparent proxy to be enabled, so it **cannot be turned off**.

{% tip %}
For more details on using the transparent proxy with Kubernetes, see [Transparent Proxy on Kubernetes]({{ docs }}/networking/transparent-proxy/kubernetes/).
{% endtip %}

## Universal

Using the transparent proxy in Universal mode makes setup easier and enables features that wouldn’t be possible otherwise. Key benefits include:

- **Simplified `Dataplane` resources**: You can skip the `networking.outbound` section, so you don’t have to list each service your application connects to manually.

> - **Simplified service connectivity**: Take advantage of [Kuma DNS]({{ docs }}/networking/dns/) to use `.mesh` domain names, like `https://service-1.mesh`, for easy service connections without needing `localhost` and ports in the `Dataplane` resource.

Author: addressed

> - **Flexible service naming**: With [MeshServices]({{ docs }}/networking/meshservice/) and [HostnameGenerators]({{ docs }}/networking/hostnamegenerator/), you can:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Flexible service addressing**: With [MeshServices]({{ docs }}/networking/meshservice/) and [HostnameGenerators]({{ docs }}/networking/hostnamegenerator/), you can:
```

I saw Charly used this form in blog post and I think it is more precise

Author: addressed

> - **Flexible service addressing**: With [MeshServices]({{ docs }}/networking/meshservice/) and [HostnameGenerators]({{ docs }}/networking/hostnamegenerator/), you can:

Author: addressed

  - Keep your existing DNS names when moving to the service mesh.
  - Give a service multiple DNS names for easier access.

>   - Set up custom routes, like targeting specific StatefulSet Pods or service versions.

Author: mistake, addressed

  - Expose a service on multiple ports for different uses.

> - **Simpler security, tracing, and observability**: Transparent proxy makes managing these features easier, with no extra setup required.

Author: it was weird point, so I just removed it
